Paper: Submission 75: Quasi-orthonormal Encoding for Machine Learning Applications (#552)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/75_lu/75_lu.rst

.. class:: keywords

   machine learning, classification, categorical encoding

Introduction
------------

While most popular machine learning methods such as deep learning
require numerical data as input, categorical data is very common
practice. For example, a person's vitals could be a combination of both,
they could include height, weight (numerical) and gender, race
(categorical). The challenge is to convert the categorical data into a
vector of some sort. 

One-hot encoding which is discussed in the next section is very

> commonly used these days in machine learning but has the draw back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
commonly used these days in machine learning but has the drawback
```

Some advantages to QOE include a reduction of dimensionality over that
of using one-hot encoding thus limiting effects of the \`\`curse of
dimensionality'' :cite:`wiki:curse` or the problem of high dimension low sample size
(HDLSS). The advantage over other encodings such as binary, hash, etc.
is that it does not induce artificial geometric relationships that can
cause downstream bias in the results because each label in a category
remains mathematically near orthogonal to the other labels.

We will briefly survey *classic* encoding methods, discuss the
theoretical aspects of QOE, and present a detailed example implementation
of QOE in tensorflow.

Background
----------

Coding methods can be categorized as *classic*, *contrast*,
*Bayesian* and *word embeddings*. Classic, contrast and Bayseian
encoding are given a good overview treatment by Hale's blog
:cite:`Hale2018` with examples to be found as part of the ``scikit-learn`` category
encoding package :cite:`scikit`. Both
contrast encoding and Bayesian encoding use the statistics of the data
to facilitate encoding. These two categories may be of use when more
statistical analysis is required, however there has not been widespread

> adoption of these emcoding techniques for machine learning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adoption of these encoding techniques for machine learning.
```

In a category of its own, word embeddings deserve special mention
:cite:`wiki:wordembeddings`. Word embeddings 
are used to represent words, phrases or even entire documents as a
vector. Their goal is that similar meaning or concepts get mapped to
vectors that are close in the target vector space. Additionally, it is
adapted for encoding a large categorical feature (i.e., words) into a
relatively lower dimensional space.

The remainder of the section will describe some common classic
categorical encodings

Ordinal Encoding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To begin our overview of fundamental encoding methods, we start with
Ordinal (Label) Encoding. Ordinal encoding is the simplest and perhaps

> most naive approach encoding a categorical feature --- one simply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most naive approach encoding for a categorical feature --- one simply
```

assigns a number to each member of a category. This is often how data
from surveys are encoded into spreadsheets for easy storage and
calculation of basic statistics. An associated data dictionary is used
to convert the values back and forth between a number and a category.
Take for example the case of gender, male could be encoded as 1 and
female as 2, with a data dictionary as follows:

> :code:``{'male': 1, 'female': 2}``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:code:`{'male': 1, 'female': 2}`
```

relationship between the categories that does not apply.

Nonetheless there are situations where ordinal encoding makes sense. For
example, a \`rate your satisfaction' survey typically encodes five levels
(1) terrible, (2) acceptable (3) mediocre, (4) good, (5) excellent.

One Hot Encoding
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is the most common encoding used in machine learning. One hot
encoding takes a category with cardinality :math:`N` and encodes each
categorical value with an :math:`N`-dimensional vector with a single \`1'
and the remainder \`0's. Take as an example encoding five makes of Japanese
Cars: Toyota, Honda, Subaru, Nissan, Mitsubishi. Table :ref:`onehot`
shows a comparison of coding between ordinal and one-hot encodings.

.. raw:: latex

   \begin{table}
     \begin{longtable*}{lcc}
     \toprule
     \textbf{Make} & \textbf{Ordinal} & \textbf{One-Hot} \\
     \midrule
     Toyota &  1 &  (1,0,0,0,0) \\
     Honda &  2 &  (0,1,0,0,0) \\
     Subaru &  3 &  (0,0,1,0,0) \\
     Nissan &  4 &  (0,0,0,1,0) \\
     Mitsubishi &  5 &  (0,0,0,0,1) \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}

     \caption{Examples of Ordinal and One-Hot Encodings \DUrole{label}{onehot}}
   \end{table}

> The advantage is that one hot encoding doesn't induce an implicit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage is that one hot encoding does not induce an implicit
```

     \midrule
     \endfirsthead
     Toyota &  1 &  001 &  (0,0,1) \\
     Honda &  2 &  010 &  (0,1,0) \\
     Subaru &  3 &  011 &  (0,1,1) \\
     Nissan &  4 &  100 &  (1,0,0) \\
     Mitsubishi &  5 &  101 &  (1,0,1) \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}
     \caption{Example of Binary Codes \DUrole{label}{binary}}

   \end{table}

Hash encoding assigns each category an ordinal value that is then
converted into a binary hash value that is encoded as an :math:`n`-tuple
in the same fashion as the binary encoding. You can view hash encoding
as binary encoding applied to the hashed ordinal value. Hash encoding
has several advantages. First, it is open ended so new categories can be
added later. Second, the resultant dimensionality can be much lower than
one-hot encoding. The chief disadvantage is that categories can collide
if two categories accidentally map into the same hash value. This is a
*hash collision* and must be fixed separately using a resolution
mechanism. Bernardi's blog :cite:`hash` provides a good treatment of hash coding.

Finally, baseN encoding is a generalization of binary encoding that uses

> a number base other than 2 (binary). Below is an example of the Japanese

Reviewer: Add reference to the figure instead of `below` because the figure is rendered at the top of the page

Author: Will do. Good catch. Forgot that tables float.

Author: Fixed

> car makes using base 3,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
car makes using base 3.
```

.. raw:: latex

   \begin{table}
     \begin{longtable*}{lcccc}
     \toprule
     & \textbf{as} & \textbf{Ternary} & \textbf{Balanced} \\
     \textbf{Make} & \textbf{Ordinal} & \textbf{Ternary} & \textbf{Code} & \textbf{Ternary Code} \\
     \midrule
     \endfirsthead
     Toyota & 1 & 01 & (0,1) & (0,1) \\
     Honda & 2 & 02 & (0,2) & (0,-1) \\
     Subaru & 3 & 10 & (1,0) & (1,0) \\
     Nissan & 4 & 11 & (1,1) & (1,1) \\
     Mitsubishi & 5 & 12 & (1,2) & (1,-1) \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}
     \caption{Example of Ternary Codes}
   \end{table}

A disadvantage of all three of these techniques is that while it does
reduce the dimension of the encoded feature, artificial geometric
relationships may creep in between unrelated categories. For example,

> :code:``(0.7,0.7)`` may be confusion between Toyota and Honda or a weak Subaru

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:code:`(0.7,0.7)` may be confusion between Toyota and Honda or a weak Subaru
```

result, although the effect is not as pronounced as ordinal encoding.

Decoding
~~~~~~~~

Of course, with categorical encoding, the ability to decode an encoded vector back to a category can be very important. If the categorical variable is only an input to a machine learning system, retrieving a category may not be very important. For example, one may have a product rating model which delivers a rating based on a number of variables, some numeric like price, but others might be categorical like color, but since the output does not require category decoding, it is not important.

> In an application such as categorization or imputation :cite:`gondara`. Retrieving the category from a vector is crucial. In a training a modern classification model, a categorical output is often subject to an activation function which converts a vector into a probability of each category such as a *softmax* function. Essentially, the softmax is a continuous and differential version of a \`\`hard max'' function which would assign a :code:`1` to the vector representing the most likely category and a :code:`0` to all the other categories. The conversion to a probability distribution allows the use of a negative log likelihood loss function rather than the standard root mean squared error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an application such as categorization or imputation :cite:`gondara`, retrieving the category from a vector is crucial. In training a modern classification model, a categorical output is often subject to an activation function which converts a vector into a probability of each category such as a *softmax* function. Essentially, the softmax is a continuous and differential version of a \`\`hard max'' function which would assign a :code:`1` to the vector representing the most likely category and a :code:`0` to all the other categories. The conversion to a probability distribution allows the use of a negative log likelihood loss function rather than the standard root mean squared error.
```

Typically, other classic encoding methods use thresholds to rectify a vector first into a binary or :math:`n`-ary value then decode the vector back to a label in accordance to the encoding. This makes them difficult to use as outputs of machine learning systems such as neural networks that rely on gradients due to lack of differentiability. Also, the decoding process is difficult to convert to a probability distribution, making negative log-likelihood or crossentropy loss functions more difficult to use.

Theory
------

> In this section, we'll briefly define and discuss quasiorthogonality, show how it relates to one-hot encoding and describe how this relationship can be used to develop a categorical encoding with lower cardinality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will briefly define and discuss quasiorthogonality, show how it relates to one-hot encoding and describe how this relationship can be used to develop a categorical encoding with lower cardinality.
```

Quasiorthogonality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In a suitably high dimensional space, two randomly selected vectors are very likely to be nearly orthogonal or quasiorthogonal. In such an :math:`n`-dimensional vector space, there are sets of :math:`K` vectors which are mutually quasiorthogonal where :math:`K\gg n.`. A more formal definition can be stated as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a suitably high dimensional space, two randomly selected vectors are very likely to be nearly orthogonal or quasiorthogonal. In such an :math:`n`-dimensional vector space, there are sets of :math:`K` vectors which are mutually quasiorthogonal where :math:`K\gg n`. A more formal definition can be stated as follows.
```

> Given an :math:`\epsilon` two vectors :math:`{\bf x}` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given an :math:`\epsilon`, two vectors :math:`{\bf x}` and
```

with one :code:`1` in the vector hence a *hot* component. The
formalization of the one hot encoding above allows *any* orthonormal
basis to be used. So to use a generalized one-hot encoding with
orthonormal basis :math:`{\mathbf{u}_i}`, one would map the label
:math:`j` to :math:`{\mathbf{u}_j}` for encoding where the
:math:`{\mathbf{u}_i}` no longer have to take the standard basis form.
To decode an encoded value in this framework, we would take

.. math::
   :label: eq:argmax

   i = \mathrm{argmax}(\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_1,\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_2,\ldots,\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_n).

This reduces to :math:`\mathrm{argmax}(\mathbf{z})` for the standard
basis. Thus, the softmax function can be expressed as the following,

.. math::
   :label: eq:gsoftmax

   \mathrm{softmax}({\bf z})_i={e^{{\bf z}\cdot {\bf u}_i}\over \sum_{j=1}^n e^{{\bf z}\cdot {\bf u}_j}}.

Encoding
~~~~~~~~

The principle behind QOE is simple. A quasiorthonormal basis :math:`\{{\bf q}_i\}` is
substituted for the orthonormal basis :math:`\{{\bf u}_i\}` described above. So given a
quasiorthonormal basis, we can define a QOE for a set :math:`L=\{l_i\}`
by :math:`l_i \mapsto \mathbf{q}_i`.

> Decoding :math:`\mathbf{z}` under QOE would use a *qargmax* function analogous to the argmax function for one-hot encoding as shown in equation :ref:`eq:qargmax` which is nearly identical to equation :ref:`eq:argmax`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decoding :math:`\mathbf{z}` under QOE would use a *qargmax* function analogous to the argmax function for one-hot encoding as shown in equation :ref:`eq:qargmax`, which is nearly identical to equation :ref:`eq:argmax`.
```

.. math::
   :label: eq:qargmax

   i = \mathrm{argmax}(\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{q}_1,\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{q}_2,\ldots,\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{q}_n)

Analogous to the softmax function shown of equation :ref:`eq:gsoftmax`, is a *qsoftmax* function which can be expressed as 

.. math::
   :label: eq:qsoftmax

   \mathrm{qsoftmax}({\bf z})_i={e^{{\bf z}\cdot {\bf q}_i}\over \sum_{j=1}^K
   e^{{\bf z}\cdot {\bf q}_j}}

The only real difference in the formulation is that while still
operating in :math:`{\mathbb R}^n` we are encoding :math:`K>n` labels.

> Returning to our example of Japanese car makes, Table :ref:`qoe` shows one-hot encoding and QOE of the five manufacturers. In the table, encodings are represented simply as vectors where :math:`\mathbf{u}_i` are unit vectors in :math:`\mathbb{R}^5` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returning to our example of Japanese car makes, table :ref:`qoe` shows one-hot encoding and QOE of the five manufacturers. In the table, encodings are represented simply as vectors where :math:`\mathbf{u}_i` are unit vectors in :math:`\mathbb{R}^5` and
```

     \midrule
     \endfirsthead
     Toyota & 1 & $\mathbf{u}_1$ & $\mathbf{q}_1$ \\
     Honda & 2 & $\mathbf{u}_2$ & $\mathbf{q}_2$ \\
     Subaru & 3 & $\mathbf{u}_3$ & $\mathbf{q}_3$ \\
     Nissan & 4 & $\mathbf{u}_4$ & $\mathbf{q}_4$ \\
     Mitsubishi & 5 & $\mathbf{u}_5$ & $\mathbf{q}_5$ \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}
     \caption{Example of Quasiorthonormal Encoding \DUrole{label}{qoe}}

   \end{table}

Implementation
--------------

Mathematical
~~~~~~~~~~~~

While equations :ref:`eq:qargmax` and :ref:`eq:qsoftmax` describe precisely mathematically how to implement decoding and activation functions. Literal implementation would not exploit the modern vectorized and accelerated computation available in such packages as ``numpy``, ``tensorflow`` and ``pytorch``.

To better exploit built-in functions of these packages, we define the following :math:`n\times K` *change of coordinates* matrix

.. math::

   \mathbf{Q}=  \left[\begin{matrix} 
   \bigg| & \bigg| & &\bigg | \\ 
   \mathbf{q}_1 & \mathbf{q}_2 & \cdots & \mathbf{q}_K \\
   \bigg| & \bigg| & &\bigg | \end{matrix}\right].

that transforms between the QOE space and the one hot encoding space. So

> given a argmax or softmax function, we can express the quasiorthonormal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given an argmax or softmax function, we can express the quasiorthonormal
```

> This transformation makes it easier to convert a set of parallel operations into matrix operations for which these aforementioned computational packages are well suited. Mathematically, the transformation maps the representation of a category encoded by QOE to a vector representing one hot encoding. Understanding this transformation makes it a simple matter to express and ``argmax`` or ``softmax`` function's quasiorthoromal variant by equations :ref:`eq:convert:argmax and :ref:`eq:convert`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This transformation makes it easier to convert a set of parallel operations into matrix operations for which these aforementioned computational packages are well suited. Mathematically, the transformation maps the representation of a category encoded by QOE to a vector representing one hot encoding. Understanding this transformation makes it a simple matter to express and ``argmax`` or ``softmax`` function's quasiorthoromal variant by equations :ref:`eq:convert:argmax` and :ref:`eq:convert`, respectively.
```

variant as follows

.. math:: \mathrm{qargmax}(\mathbf{z}) = \mathrm{argmax}(\mathbf{Qz})

and

.. math::
   :label: eq:convert

   \mathrm{qsoftmax}(\mathbf{z}) = \mathrm{softmax}(\mathbf{Qz}).

This facilitates the use of optimized functions such as ``softmax`` in libraries
like ``tensorflow`` and using the above matrix enables quick

> implementation of QOE into these packages. Not only will using native functions accelerated performance it can exploit features such as auto differentiation built into the native functions. A useful property if one wishes to use the qsoftmax function as an activation function.

Reviewer: Could you please rewrite the two last sentences. They are hard to understand :(

Author: I rewrote the section this morning. Let me know if the revised phrasing helps or if it is still problematic. Will commit as soon as I get some of your other suggested changes in.

Author: Let me know if the last commit fixes this.

> Since the matrix manipulation operations and input/output shape definitions differ from package to package, we provide a qsoftmax implementation in several popular packages. In order to facilitate the most general format possible, in our examples, we will express the quasiorthogonal basis as an list of list, but the input and the output is expressed in the appropriate native class (e.g. :code:`numpy.ndarray` in ``numpy``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the matrix manipulation operations and input/output shape definitions differ from package to package, we provide a qsoftmax implementation in several popular packages. In order to facilitate the most general format possible, in our examples, we will express the quasiorthogonal basis as a list of list, but the input and the output is expressed in the appropriate native class (e.g. :code:`numpy.ndarray` in ``numpy``).
```

Numpy
~~~~~

For ``numpy``, the implementation is straight-forward and follows equation :ref:`eq:convert` almost literally and is given below.

.. code:: python

    def qsoftmax(x, basis):
        qx = np.matmul(np.asarray(basis),x)
        return softmax(qx)

> Since ``qsoftmax`` given above requires the basis as a parameter as well as the input vector, it is a parameterized activation function. In many packages, only unparameterized functions can be used. The following function factory or metafunction can be used to return a function ``qsoftmax`` function for a given basis, rather than encoding the function above in a ``lambda`` expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since ``qsoftmax`` given above requires the basis as a parameter as well as the input vector, it is a parameterized activation function. In many packages, only unparameterized functions can be used. The following function factory or metafunction can be used to return a  ``qsoftmax`` function for a given basis, rather than encoding the function above in a ``lambda`` expression.
```

        
.. code:: python

    def qsoftmax(basis):
        def func(x):
            qx = np.matmul(np.asarray(basis),x)
            return softmax(qx)
        return func

The ``softmax`` function used above can be found in ``scipy.special.softmax`` or can easily be written as

.. code:: python

   def softmax(x):
        ex=np.exp(x)
        return ex/np.sum(ex)

Tensorflow
~~~~~~~~~~

> For ``tensorflow``, the following segment of code is an implementation of the ``qsoftmax``functions. By using native ``tensorflow`` functions, the resultant ``qsoftmax`` function will be automatically differentiated in a backwards neural network pass. It is also worth noting that quite often due to the way ``tensorflow`` performs batch processing,  the input to the activation function is not a vector but an array of vectors as a ``Tensor`` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ``tensorflow``, the following segment of code is an implementation of the ``qsoftmax`` functions. By using native ``tensorflow`` functions, the resultant ``qsoftmax`` function will be automatically differentiated in a backwards neural network pass. It is also worth noting that quite often due to the way ``tensorflow`` performs batch processing,  the input to the activation function is not a vector but an array of vectors as a ``Tensor`` class.
```

The following segment of code is an implementation of the ``qsoftmax`` using ``tensorflow`` functions. By using native ``tensorflow`` functions, the resultant ``qsoftmax`` function will be automatically differentiated in a backwards neural network pass.

.. code:: python

    def qsoftmax(x, basis):
        qx = tf.matmul(tf.constant(basis), x,
                       transpose_b=True)        
        return tf.nn.softmax(tf.transpose(qx))

The wrapped metafunction version of ``qsoftmax`` is also presented as this will be used below in our example of MNIST handwriting classification employing QOE.

.. code:: python

    def qsoftmax(basis):
        def func(x):
            qx = tf.matmul(tf.constant(basis), x,
                           transpose_b=True)        
            return tf.nn.softmax(tf.transpose(qx))
        return func

Pytorch
~~~~~~~

> Presented below is a version of the ``qsoftmax`` function implemented using ``pytorch`` primitives. The use of the ``squeeze`` and ``unsqueeze`` operations convert between a 1-dimensional vector and a 2-dimension matrix having one column. This function is only designed to accept vector inputs. In some models, especially image related models, outputs of some layers maybe multidimensional arrays. If your use case requires a multidimensional imput to the ``qsoftmax`` function the code may need alteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presented below is a version of the ``qsoftmax`` function implemented using ``pytorch`` primitives. The use of the ``squeeze`` and ``unsqueeze`` operations convert between a 1-dimensional vector and a 2-dimension matrix having one column. This function is only designed to accept vector inputs. In some models, especially image related models, outputs of some layers may be multidimensional arrays. If your use case requires a multidimensional input to the ``qsoftmax`` function the code may need alteration.
```

.. code:: python

    def qsoftmax(x, basis):
       qx = torch.mm(torch.tensor(basis), 
                     x.unsqueeze(0).t()).t().squeeze()
       return torch.nn.functional.softmax(qx,dim=0)

Construction of an Quasiorthonormal set
---------------------------------------

> It is difficult find explicit constructions of quasiorthonormal sets in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is difficult to find explicit constructions of quasiorthonormal sets in
```

the literature. Several methods are mentioned by Kainen :cite:`kainan`, but
these constructions are theoretical and hard

> to follow. There are a number of combinatorial problems related such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to follow. There are a number of combinatorial problems related to such as
```

spherical codes :cite:`wiki:spheres` and Steiner Triple Systems :cite:`wiki:steiner`, which strive to find optimal solutions. These are extremely complicated mathematical constructions and not every optimal solution has been found.

> As a practical matter, optimal solutions are not necessary as long as the desired characteristics of the quasiorthonormal basis are obtained. As an example, while an optimal solution finds 28 quasiorthonormal vectors with dot products of 0.5 or under are possible in seven dimensions, you may only need 10 vectors. In other words, a suboptimal solution may yield fewer vectors than are possible for a given dimension, or a larger dimension may be required to obtain the desired number of vectors than is theoretically needed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a practical matter, optimal solutions are not necessary as long as the desired characteristics of the quasiorthonormal basis are obtained. As an example, while an optimal solution finds 28 quasiorthonormal vectors with dot products of 0.5 or under are possible in seven dimensions, you may only need 10 vectors. In other words, a suboptimal solution may yield fewer vectors that are possible for a given dimension, or a larger dimension may be required to obtain the desired number of vectors that is theoretically needed. 
```

Simple Example and Comparison
-----------------------------

To demonstrate how QOE can be used in machine learning, we provide a simple experiment/demonstration.
This demonstration in addition to showing how to construct a classification system using QOE gives an sense of the effect of QOE on accuracy. As an initial experiment, we applied QOE to classification of the Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST) handwriting dataset :cite:`mnist`, using the 60000 training examples with 10000 test
examples. As there are 10 categories, we needed sets of quasiorthonormal
bases with 10 elements. We took the spherical code for 24 points in
4-dimensions, giving us 12 quasi-orthogonal vectors. The maximum
pairwise dot product was 0.5 leading to an angle of 60\ :math:`^\circ`.
We also took the spherical code for 56 points in 7-dimensions, giving 28
quasi-orthogonal vectors. The maximum pairwise dot product was .33

> leading to an angle of a little over 70\ :math:`^\circ`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leading to an angle of a little over 70\ :math:`^\circ`.
```

We used a hidden layer with 64 units with a ReLU activation function.
Next there is a 20% dropout layer to mitigate overtraining, then an

> output layer whose width depends on the encoding used. We elected for this demonstration to use one of the simplest models hence there are no convolutional or pooling layers used as often seen in other sample MNIST handwriting classifers. The following example is implemented using ``tensorflow`` and ``keras``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
output layer whose width depends on the encoding used. We selected for this demonstration to use one of the simplest models hence there are no convolutional or pooling layers used as often seen in other sample MNIST handwriting classifiers. The following example is implemented using ``tensorflow`` and ``keras``.
```

      tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.2),
      tf.keras.layers.Dense(7),
      tf.keras.layers.Lambda(qsoftmax(basis7))
    ])

Table :ref:`tab:qoe` shows the mean of the accuracy over three training runs
of the validation data with training data in parentheses.

.. raw:: latex

   \begin{table}
     \begin{longtable*}{lcccc}
     \toprule
     \textbf{Number of} & \textbf{One Hot} & \textbf{7-Dimensional} & \textbf{4-Dimensional} \\
     \textbf{Epochs} & \textbf{Encoding} & \textbf{QOE} & \textbf{QOE} \\
     \midrule
     \endfirsthead
     10 & 97.53\% (97.30\%) & 97.24\% (96.94\%) & 95.65\% (95.15\%) \\
     20 & 97.68\% (98.02\%) & 97.49\% (97.75\%) & 95.94\% (96.15\%) \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}
     \caption{Results of MNIST QOE Experiment \DUrole{label}{tab:qoe}}
   \end{table}

From these results, it is clear that there is some degradation in performance as the number of dimensions is reduced, but clearly QOE can be used leading to a tradeoff between accuracy and resource reduction from the reduction of dimensionality.

Extending to Spherical Encodings
--------------------------------

A Deeper Look at Softmax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In principle, according to equation :ref:`eq:argmax`, the dot product against a basis be it orthonormal or quasiorthonormal recovers the category from a potentially noisy encoded value. If one takes a deeper dive into equations :ref:`eq:gsoftmax` and :ref:`eq:qsoftmax`, it is interesting to see what these functions are doing. Figure :ref:`fig:ortho` shows on the left, randomly selected values in a circle of radius 6. On the right shows the vectors after the softmax function is applied. Clearly with a few stragglers, most points either move very close to either of the basis vectors :math:`(0,1)` or :math:`(1,0)`. For this graphic the radius of 6 is chosen because upon examining the input to the softmax function in the example above, the average magnitude of each component is 5.5. In reality, 6 is probably a conservatively low value. Due to the exponential term in the softmax function, even large components would make the separation more pronounced.

Reviewer: I don't understand the first sentence. Could you please rewrite it.

> In principle, to recover a category from a potentially noisy encoded vector, the dot product of the encoded vector against each basis vector in accordance with equation :ref:`eq:argmax` whether the basis is orthonormal or quasiorthonormal. If one takes a deeper dive into equations :ref:`eq:gsoftmax` and :ref:`eq:qsoftmax`, it is interesting to see what these functions are doing. Figure :ref:`fig:ortho` shows on the left, randomly selected values in a circle of radius 6. On the right shows the vectors after the softmax function is applied. Clearly with a few stragglers, most points either move very close to either of the basis vectors :math:`(0,1)` or :math:`(1,0)`. For this graphic the radius of 6 is chosen because upon examining the input to the softmax function in the example above, the average magnitude of each component is 5.5. In reality, 6 is probably a conservatively low value. Due to the exponential term in the softmax function, even large components would make the separation more pronounced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In principle, to recover a category from a potentially noisy encoded vector, we take the dot product of the encoded vector and each basis vector (whether orthonormal or quasiorthonormal) in accordance with equation :ref:`eq:argmax`. If one takes a deeper dive into equations :ref:`eq:gsoftmax` and :ref:`eq:qsoftmax`, it is interesting to see what these functions are doing. Figure :ref:`fig:ortho` shows on the left, randomly selected values in a circle of radius 6. On the right are the vectors after the softmax function is applied. Clearly with a few stragglers, most points either move very close to either of the basis vectors :math:`(0,1)` or :math:`(1,0)`.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't fully understand the point of the last couple sentences. What does the radius of the circle signify?

Author: Since (on monitoring the inputs to the softmax I found the output to be on average about 5.5. Part of this was justification as to why I chose 6 to randomly select from rather than 1 or 40. 
 I guess that wasn't well expressed

Author: I rewrote the last couple of sentences.

.. figure:: 1.pdf

   Softmax on an orthonormal basis :label:`fig:ortho`

> Similarly, figure :ref:`fig:qortho` shows on the the same type of distribution of randomly selected values and the right shows the effect after a quasiorthonormal softmax is applied with three basis vectors. Since the qsoftmax function would map the two dimensional input into a three dimensional space, for graphics sake, the three dimensional vectors are mapped back down to two dimensions using the quasiorthonormal basis. Again with the exception of a few stragglers, most points move very close to one of the three basis vectors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, figure :ref:`fig:qortho` shows the same type of distribution of randomly selected values and the right shows the effect after a quasiorthonormal softmax is applied with three basis vectors. Since the qsoftmax function maps the two dimensional input into a three-dimensional space, the three-dimensional vectors are mapped back down to two dimensions using the quasiorthonormal basis. Again with the exception of a few stragglers, most points move very close to one of the three basis vectors.
```

.. figure:: 3.pdf

   Softmax on a quasiorthogonal basis :label:`fig:qortho`
   
It is clear from equation :ref:`eq:gsoftmax` that the exponential term in the numerator  dominates which is why the softmax is effective.  But consider if :math:`\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_i` is much less than zero such as :math:`\mathbf{z}=-5 \mathbf{u}_i`, then the exponential numerator for that term would severely attenuate the output even though the :math:`\mathbf{z}` lies along the same direction as :math:`\mathbf{u}_i`. 
Since the :math:`\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_j=0` for all other *j*'s, it would still decode to :math:`i`, but because the :math:*i*-th term is so small, any noise could lead to decoding to a different value.

> So why bring all this up? Clearly, values encode to negative values along a basis vector would prove problematic. But it offers the prospect of further reducing dimensionality by encoding to no just the basis a vector but also its antipodal vector. To further our graphical example, in figure :ref:`fig:sphere`, we use :math:`(1,0)`, :math:`(0,1)` and their antipodal vectors :math:`(-1,0)` and :math:`(0,-1)` to encode values and apply a softmax using those vectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why bring all this up? Clearly, values encoding to negative values along a basis vector would prove problematic. But it offers the prospect of further reducing dimensionality by encoding to no just the basis a vector but also its antipodal vector. To further our graphical example, in figure :ref:`fig:sphere`, we use :math:`(1,0)`, :math:`(0,1)` and their antipodal vectors :math:`(-1,0)` and :math:`(0,-1)` to encode values and apply a softmax using those vectors.
```

> Since the :math:`\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_j=0` for all other *j*'s, it would still decode to :math:`i`, but because the :math:*i*-th term is so small, any noise could lead to decoding to a different value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the :math:`\mathbf{z}\cdot\mathbf{u}_j=0` for all other *j*'s, it would still decode to :math:`i`, but because the :math:`i`-th term is so small, any noise could lead to decoding to a different value.
```

.. figure:: 4.pdf

            Softmax on encoded values using an orthonormal basis and antipodal points :label:`fig:sphere`

Once again we see the power of the exponential term and most points move very close to one of the four encoding vectors.

Of course nothing comes for free, if a prediction gets confused
between two antipodal unit vectors, the result could be that they cancel
out and allow the noise to dictate the resulting category. By contrast,
for one-hot encoding, the result would get decoded as one of the two
possible values.

With this risk in mind, we can further extend the idea to a

> quasiorthogonal basis by adding the antipodal vectors for each vector in

Reviewer 2: I think we can sum up these paragraphs into one. The issue isn't whether or not we have negative numbers in our basis. The issue is more that the number of basis vectors we use is higher than the dimension and thus there can be more ambiguity than with one-hot encodings where the two numbers are the same.

Author: I'm all for being succinct as I know I can be long winded when I'm uncertain how to make a point. I guess the point being made here is the reason originally for considering QO vectors only is that the dot product is small. Though an oversimplification SC are QO vectors with their negatives. Turns out if  v is normal then  the dot product between v and -v would not be small but -1. The softmax however does separate these since the exponential terms squash the negatives. The third paragraph just cautions that like in the case of ordinal coding there if v and -v are unrelated categories you've now induced a relationship (one which softmax separates) but could have other statistical implications.

To be honest, when I saw the figures (which I was used to make sure the code was working), I saw the pattern and asked, "I wonder if this would work".

Author: I rewrote this. Hopefully this is better

.. raw:: latex

   \begin{table}
     \begin{longtable*}{lcccc}
     \toprule
     \textbf{Number of} & \textbf{One Hot} & \textbf{5-Dimensional} & \textbf{3-Dimensional} \\
     \textbf{Epochs} & \textbf{Encoding} & \textbf{Spherical Code} & \textbf{Spherical Code} \\
     \midrule
     \endfirsthead
     10 & 97.53\% (97.30\%) & 96.51\% (96.26\%) & 95.37\% (94.83\%) \\
     20 & 97.68\% (98.02\%) & 96.82\% (97.11\%) & 95.74\% (95.83\%) \\
     \bottomrule
     \end{longtable*}
     \caption{Results of MNIST Spherical Coding Experiment \DUrole{label}{tab:spherecode}}
   \end{table}

In this case, the 5-dimensional spherical codes performed close to the

> one-hot encoding by not as closely as the 7-dimension QO codes. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one-hot encoding by not as closely as the 7-dimension QOE codes. The
```

> 3-dimensional spherical codes performed on par with the 4-dimensional QO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3-dimensional spherical codes performed on par with the 4-dimensional QOE
```

codes.

While the extreme dimensionality reduction from 10 to 4 or 10 to 3 did

> not yield comparable performance to one-hot encoding. More modest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not yield comparable performance to one-hot encoding, more modest
```

reductions such as 10 to 7 and 10 to 5 did. It is worth considering that
quasiorthogonal or spherical codes are much harder to find in low
dimensions. One should note that, though we went from 10 to 7
dimensions, we did not fully exploit the space spanned by the
quasiorthogonal vector set. Otherwise, we would likely have had the
similar results if the categorical labels had a cardinality of 28 rather
than 10.

Conclusion
----------

> These reduced dimensionality codes are not expected to improve accuracy when the training data is plentiful, but to save computation and representation by reducing the dimensionality of the coded category. As an example, in application such as autoencoders and specifically the imputation architectures presented by :cite:`gondara` and :cite:`lu` where the dimensionality not only dictates the number of outputs and inputs but also the number of hidden layers, a reduction in dimensionality has a profound impact on the size of the model used. Beyond that the reduced dimensionality codes such as QOE and spherical codes can address problems such as the curse of dimensionality and HDLSS where for small sample sizes it may improve accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These reduced dimensionality codes are not expected to improve accuracy when the training data is plentiful, but to save computation and representation by reducing the dimensionality of the coded category. As an example, in applications such as autoencoders and specifically the imputation architectures presented by :cite:`gondara` and :cite:`lu`, where the dimensionality not only dictates the number of outputs and inputs but also the number of hidden layers, a reduction in dimensionality has a profound impact on the size of the model used. Beyond that, the reduced dimensionality codes such as QOE and spherical codes can address problems such as the curse of dimensionality and HDLSS where for small sample sizes it may improve accuracy.
```

Though for the exercises presented here, the reduction of dimensionality is modest and may not seem worth the trouble. The real benefit of these codes is in extremely high cardinality situations on the order of hundreds, thousands and beyond, such as zip codes, area codes, or medical diagnostic codes.

Practically speaking, while algorithms to generate spherical codes and quasiorthonormal sets are few, :cite:`sphere` has a vast complication of spherical codes. At the extreme end, a spherical code with 196,560 vectors is available in 24 dimensions, enough to encode nearly 100,000 labels using QOE or 200,000 labels using spherical codes, *in just 24 dimensions!*

> In sum, the advantages of QOE and spherical codes is that they can reduce the dimensionality of the vector representation as compared to one-hot encoding, while not inducing artificial geometric relationships as ordinal or binary codes can. The disadvantage is that the accuracy of decoding an encoded vector in a noisy environment (such as classification output) is slightly less than one-hot encoding. This tradeoff ability makes QOE and spherical codes useful tools to be included in a data scientists tool box along side other established categorical coding techniques.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In sum, the advantages of QOE and spherical codes are that they can reduce the dimensionality of the vector representation as compared to one-hot encoding, while not inducing artificial geometric relationships as ordinal or binary codes can. The disadvantage is that the accuracy of decoding an encoded vector in a noisy environment (such as classification output) is slightly less than one-hot encoding. This tradeoff ability makes QOE and spherical codes useful tools to be included in a data scientists toolbox alongside other established categorical coding techniques.
```

spherical codes :cite:`wiki:spheres` and Steiner Triple Systems :cite:`wiki:steiner`, which strive to find optimal solutions. These are extremely complicated mathematical constructions and not every optimal solution has been found.

Since in a high dimensional space, two random vectors are likely to be
quasiorthogonal, it is tempting to take a brute force approach and
simply randomly select :math:`k` vectors at random and test the
set. This approach is reasonable for small dimensions or small
:math:`k`. However, the set must have every vector be mutually
quasiorthogonal and combinatoric complications quickly set in.

Suppose, the probability of any two vectors being quasiorthogonal to a
given :math:`\epsilon` is :math:`p`. Since there are :math:`{k\choose 2}` 
pairs of vectors, the probability that you have a quasiorthogonal set
is :math:`p^{k\choose 2}`. To put in concrete terms, if two random
vectors have a 99% chance of being quasiorthogonal. Picking a set of
20 is only 14% and 30 is around 1%. Other factors conspire to make
this difficult including the increasing computational complexity and
the geometric differences between a cube and sphere become more

> pronounced as :math:`k` and :math:`N` grow.

Reviewer 2: It'd be great if you could rewrite the above two paragraphs to suggest the possibility of taking a set of `m > k` vectors and using them which improves the probability considerably.

Author: I don't understand the suggestion. Are you talking about using an incremental approach?
It's one of I'm sure countless approaches one can try. If you look at section 4 and 5 of the Kainan/Kurkova paper, they suggest ways to construct such as with the hamming cube in your suggested code.

I had a chance to run your code. First of all, thanks for the suggestion and don't take this as a criticism because we all have to start out somewhere exploring this.

First to fairly compare to the example in the paper epsilon is .333 but your `d` should be 7. Second, you left out an absolute value around the inner product. With that running the snippet as follows (I set the iterations up to 10000 for completeness).

```
def quasi_orthonormal(d, m, eps=0.25): 
    vectors = [] 
    for _ in range(m): 
        candidate = np.power(-1, np.random.randint(2, size=d)) / np.sqrt(d) 
        if all([np.abs(np.inner(v, candidate)) < eps for v in vectors]):         
            vectors.append(candidate) 
    return vectors
```

with
```
[len(quasi_orthonormal(7, 10000, .333)) for _ in range(10)]
```
yielded [8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8]

For 7-dimensions with an epsilon of .3333. You can find 28 vectors.

Author: @githomin are we good here are do you still want some changes?

   Softmax on a quasiorthogonal basis :label:`fig:qortho`
   

Because the expectation on one-hot encoding is that the value of a
given vector component be either :math:`0` or :math:`1` and that
negative values are not expected even in a noisy environment. This is
evident in figure :ref:`fig:ortho`, where the results are all in the

> first quadrant (i.e. no negative values). This begs the question could

Reviewer 2: ~begs the question~ raises the question:

Author: fixed in last commit will resolve this

> the negative values be exploited with minimal detrimental effects. 

Reviewer 2: ~effects.~ effects?

Author: Fixed in last commit
